What’s wrong with "the grid"?

The grid system in spreadsheets is very simple. It’s also very powerful. It’s powerful because it’s simple. As a user you can immediately start entering data without even thinking about it. And then in an ad hoc fashion you can add logic and conditions as you think of them.

this fast and loose paradigm is also the downfall of spreadsheets, because the user is encouraged to do form of programming without encouraging them to do any kind of disciplined of programming. Spreadsheets quickly get out of hand. The boundaries are arbitrary and usually the boundaries are only visual which means it’s very difficult to write code based on this. For example there is a famous case of a large bread she used in government decision making, and there was a miscalculation because a few rows at the end of an array of items were not taken into account because the user specified them in range.

However in normal programming we have not just one data structure. And the grid is just one data structure. It is a matrix of practically infinite width and height and you can access its elements by coordinates. Put in program and – – normal programming – – we have for example, arrays. If a raise were used for the list of elements in this example, there wouldn’t have been this bug because you don’t have to specify how many elements of infinite array do you want to look at the road by definition has a length.

Data structures like arrays and lists and matrices can all be approximated in a spreadsheet by a grid. However, anything more than this becomes awkward very quickly. For example a simple record consisting of a name and an H in the spreadsheet must be modeled by using a sale for the label of the name and label of the age, and then the value for each thing. In normal programming languages, this is called a record.  There’s no need for any kind of strange and brittle hacking and tricks to make this work as you have to do in a spreadsheet. And in fact while the basic spreadsheet as is is very very accessible to the normal person who just wants to do every day calculations about their business or whatever, actually the idea of a record or a list or a tree or a graph are actually very intuitive because they actually model the kind of data That their domain is dealing with.

Therefore we find spreadsheets very lacking, in fact, when we try to model even every day pedestrian problems.  Consider for example trying to model the royal family tree, or your own personal family tree, or the hierarchical structure of the US government, or a taxonomy of a species. These are three data structures, perfectly normal, well understood, pliable, things that you can express in a programming language and manipulate using code in a very logical manner. You can count how many items are in the tree you can restrict the tree to a certain branch and do operations there you can do an operation on each node in the tree, you can transpose the tree and flip it upside down.

Another example is a graph. For example, the coronavirus can be modeled by its spread using a graph the graph consists of a set of people in the connections between those people. Do you knows which have more connections indicate that this person was more contagious in the spread to more people. You can easily write code to count how many connections a given note has to it, and also count how many transitive notes are connected to it, in other words, you can measure what the influences of one person within a community.

Both of those things are impossible, practically, to describe, talk about, express, manipulate, visualize, in a traditional grid Dash-based spreadsheet.

So we’ve established two things so far. The first is that the grid system locks boundaries between different data structures, which can lead to bugs. Second is that there are actually very normal, every day, useful data structures which we should in a reasonable system be able to express, but which the grid system is unable to express.

Additionally, we have seen that these data structures actually have very well understood and rich and useful operations which work only if you have that kind of data structure.

Turn into a different topic, when you have different data structures, you can start to add checks that help you avoid making more mistakes. You can add a type system to your language. The whole purpose of a type system is to make sure that you are combining your different operations together in a way that makes sense. Not putting a square peg in around hole. For example, you can calculate the sum of an array, of a graph, of a tree, however, you cannot concatenate a graph to an array. What would that even mean? It’s easy to reduce to regular programming languages because they have data structures.

But a spreadsheet simply has one Single data structure: the grid. And, the only elements that you can put in that data structure are Numbers and strings and dates. In other words. Atomic values. But that’s not real life. There’s no reason that I should not be able to have an array of a raise. Or a tree of records. Or a list of records. I should, hypothetically, be able to arbitrarily nest data structures as much is my problem needs me to do.

We can’t forget atomic data structures too, of course. Data types like date, time, integer, decimal, currency are all atomic and still should not be combined together in the wrong way. You cannot for example add two dates together. What would that even mean. But you can subtract one date from another. That would give you a duration. The type system should prevent me from making mistakes with these types too.

In conclusion, we’ve looked at reasons why a traditional spreadsheet grid system is lacking in several key areas of expression, correctnessAnd even convenience, in a way that is actually important for normal every day work and not just for programmers.
